<page id=46>
ALTERED PHYSICALITY

What we have been describing are modifications to the perceived physicality of the sound. If we proceed now to sounds which also have a continuation, subtle alterations of the onset characteristics may still radically alter the perceived physicality of the sound. For example we can impose a sudden-initiated (struck-like) onset on any sound purely by providing an appropriate onset loudness trajectory, or we can make a sound gradual-initiated by giving it an onset loudness trajectory which rises more slowly. In the grain time-frame we can proceed from the "struck inelastic object" to the "struck resonating object" to the "rubbed" and beyond that to the situation where the sound appears to rise out of nowhere like the "singing" of bowl gongs or bloogles. (Sound example 4.5).

Where the sound has a "struck" quality, we may imply not just the energy but the physical quality of the striking medium. Harder striking agents tend to excite higher frequencies in the spectrum of the vibrated material (compare padded stick, rubber headed sticks and wooden sticks on a vibraphone).  We can generalise this notion of physical "hardness" of an onset, to the onset of any sound. By exaggerating the high frequency components in the onset moment we create a more "hard" or "brittle" attack. (I make no apologies for using these qualitative or analogical terms. Grain time-frame events have an indivisible qualitative unity as percepts. We can give physical and mathematical correlates for many of the perceived properties, but in the immediate moment of perception we do not apprehend these physical and mathematical correlates. These are things we learn to appreciate on reflection and repeated listening.)

One way to achieve this attack hardening is to mix octave upward transposed copies of the source onto the onset moment, with loudness trajectories which have a very sudden onset and then die away relatively quickly behind the original sound (we do not have to use octave transposition and the rate of decay is clearly a matter of aesthetic intent and judgement). (octave stacking). The transpositions might be in the time frame of the original sound, or time-contracted (as with tape-speed variation See Chapter 11). The latter will add new structure to the attack, particularly if the sound itself is quickly changing. We can also, of course, enhance the attack with downward transpositions of a sound, with similar loudness trajectories, the physical correlate of such a process being less clear. This latter fact is not necessarily important as, in sound composition, we are creating an artificial sonic world. (Sound example 4.6).

We can, for example, achieve in this way a "hard" or "metallic" attack to a sound which is revealed (immediately) in its continuation to be the sound of water, or human speech, or a non-representational spectrum suggesting physical softness and elasticity. We are not constrained by the photographically real, but our perception is guided by physical intuition even when listening to sound made in the entirely contrived space of sound composition. (Sound example 4.7).

Another procedure is to add noise to the sound onset but allow it to die away very rapidly. We may cause the noisiness to 'resolve' onto an actual wavelength of the modified sound by preceding that wavelength with repetitions of itself which are increasingly randomised i.e. noisier. This produces a plucked-string-like attack (sound plucking) and relates to a well known synthesis instrument for producing plucked string sounds called the Karplus Strong algorithm. (Sound example 4.8).

The effect of modifying the onset has to be taken into consideration when other processes are put into motion. In particular, time-stretching the onset of a sound will alter its loudness trajectory and may even extend it beyond the grain time-frame. As the onset is so perceptually significant,
</page>
