
COMPRESSION
60
Reducing the loudness of a sound by greater amounts where the sound itself becomes louder.
CONSTRUCTED CONTINUATION
The extension of a sound by some compositional process (e.g. brassage, zigzagging).
CONSTRUCTIVE DISTORTION
A process which generates musically interesting artefacts from the intrinsic properties of the waveform
or the (time-varying) spectrum of a sound.
CONTINUATION
Where sounds are longer than grains, we hear how the sound qualities evolve in time, (their
morphology). These sounds have continuation.
CONTOUR
The shape of some property of a sound at one moment in time. In particular, the shape of the spectrum.
This is often referred to as Spectral Envelope. However, Envelope is also used to describe the
time-changing evolution of a property (especially Loudness). To avoid any confusion, this book
reserves Trajectory for such time-changing properties, and Contour for the instantaneous shape of a
property. The names of computer instruments may however use the term 'Envelope'.
The spectral contour describes the overall loudness contour of the spectrum at a single moment in time.
But note that the spectral contour may itself evolve (change) through time.
CORRUGATION
60
CROTCHET = 120
An indication of the speed at which musical events succeed one another. Here the duration unit,
crotchet, occurs 120 times every second. This speed is known as the Tempo.
CSOUND
A general purpose computer language which allows a composer to describe a sound-generating
procedure (synthesis method) and ways to control it, in almost any degree of detail, and to define a
sequence of events (a score) using the sounds generated, and which then generates the sound events
thus defined. CSound is the most recent development of a series of such general purpose synthesis
engines, and the one in most common use at the time of writing (Autumn, 1994).
CUTTING
40
115