
PORTAMENTO
Sliding of pitch. Often incorrectly referred to as glissando, but there is an important distinction. On a
fretted or keyed instrument like a piano, we may slide fingers from a high pitch to a low pitch, but the
keys allow us to access only the pitches of the scale, and we hear a rapid descending scale passage: a
glissando. On a trombone or violin, a similar motion with the slide, or the finger along the string, causes
pitch to fall through the continuum, without picking out intervening scale pitches: a portamento.
PROCESS-FOCUSSED TRANSFORMATION
Some musical processes will so radically alter a source sound that the perceived goal-sound is more
dependent on the process of transformation than on the source itself. The same process applied to two
very different sources will produce very similar goal-sounds. The perceived result of the procedure
is
governed more by the artefacts of the process of transformation, rather than by the particular nature of
the source-sounds employed.
Q
8
The steepness with which a filter cuts out unwanted frequencies.
QUANTISATION
Forcing the timing of events on to a time grid of a specific size. E.g. we may set a grid at 0.01 seconds.
Any event must then fall at some multiple of 0.01 seconds. ALternatively we may set a grid at some
division of the metrical unit e.g. a grid of demi-semi-quavers. All events must then fall on some
multiple of demi-semiquaver divisions of the beat. The actual time quantisation will then also be
determined by the tempo (the number of crotchets per second). The quantisation grid provides a time
reference-frame. On keyed or fretted instruments, pitch is similarly quantised.
QUARTER TONE
A very small division of the musical scale. Half a semitone (the smallest interval accessible on a
standard European keyboard instrument, like a piano).
128