<page id=21>
STABILITY & MOTION : REFERENCE FRAMES

In general, any property of a sound (pitch, loudness, spectral contour etc) may be (relatively) stable, or it may be in motion (portamento, crescendo, opening of a filter, etc.) Furthermore, motion may itself be in motion, e.g. cyclically varying pitch (vibrato) may be accelerating in cycle-duration, while shrinking in pitch-depth. Cyclical motions of various kinds (tremolo, vibrato, spectral vibrato, etc.) are often regarded as stable properties of a sound.

We may be concerned with stable properties, or with the nature of motion itself and these aspects of sound properties are usually perceptually distinguishable. Their separation is exaggerated in Western Art Music by the use of a discontinuous notation system which notates static properties well, but moving properties much less precisely (for a fuller discussion see On Sonic Art).

Furthermore, our experiences of sonic change are often fleeting and only inexactly reproducible. We can, for example, reproduce the direction, duration and range of a rising portamento and in practice, we can differentiate a start-weighted from an end-weighted portamento. (See Diagram 6).

In many non-Western cultures, subtle control of such distinctions (portamento type, vibrato speed and depth etc) are required skills of the performance practice. But the reproduction of a complex portamento trajectory (see Diagram 7) with any precision would be difficult merely from immediate memory. The difficulty of immediate reproducibility makes repetition in performance very difficult and therefore acquaintance and knowledge through familiarity impossible to acquire.

With computer technology, however, complex, time-varying aspects of a sound-event can be tied down with precision, reproduced and transferred to other sounds. For the first time, we have sophisticated control over sonic motion in many dimensions (pitch, loudness, spectral contour or formant evolution, spectral harmonicity/inharmonicity etc. etc.) and can begin to develop a discipline of motion itself (see Chapter 13).

In sound composition, the entire continuum of sound possibilities is open to us, and types of motion are as accessible as static states. But in our perception of our sound universe there is another factor to be considered, that of the reference-frame. We may choose to (it is not inevitable!) organise a sound property in relation to a set of reference values. These provide reference points, or nameable foci, in the continuum of sonic possibilities. Thus, for example, any particular language provides a phonetic reference-frame distinguishing those vowels and consonant types to be regarded as different (and hence capable of articulating different meanings) within the continuum of possibilities. These distinctions may be subtle ("D" and "T" in English) and are often problematic for the non-native speaker (English "L" and "R" for a Japanese speaker).

Usually, these reference frames refer to stable properties of the sonic space but this is not universal.  Consonants like "W" and "Y" (in English) and various vowel diphthongs are in fact defined by the motion of their spectral contours (formants : see Appendix p3). But in general, reference frames for motion types are not so well understood and certainly do not feature strongly in traditional Western art music practice. Nevertheless, we are equipped in the sphere of language perception, at the level of the phoneme ("w", "y", etc. and tone languages like Chinese) and of "tone-of-voice", to make very subtle distinctions of pitch motion and spectral motion. They are vital to our comprehension at the phonemic and semantic level. And in fact, sounds with moving spectral contours tend to be classified alongside sounds with stable spectral contours in the phonetic classification system of any particular language.
</page>
