<page id=57>
DISSOLVING GRAIN-STREAMS

Just as continuous sounds can be made discontinuous, grain-streams can be dissolved into continuous, or even single-grain, forms. Speeding up a grain-stream by tape speed variation or spectral time-contraction (with no grain pitch alteration) may force the grain separation under the minimum time limit for grain-perception and the granulation frequency will eventually emerge as a pitch. (Sound example 6.9). Alternatively, by speeding up the sequence rate of grains without changing the grains (granular time-shrinking : see below) we will breach the grain-perception limit. The sound will gradually become a continuous fuzz. In this case a related pitch may or may not emerge. (Sound example 6.10). Reverberation will blur the distinction between grains. (Sound example 6.11).  Increasing the grain density (e.g. via the parameters of a granular synthesis instrument ) will also gradually fog over the granular property of a grain-stream. (Sound example 6.12).

Grain-streams may also be dissociated in other ways....

(1) slowing down the sequence of grains but not the grains themselves so that grains become detached events in their own right (granular time-stretching : Sound example 6.13).

(2) slowing down the sequence and the grains, so the internal morphology of the individual events comes to the foreground of perception (spectral time-stretching : Sound example 6.14).

(3) gradually shifting the pitches or spectral quality of different grains differently, so the grain-stream becomes a sequence (granular reordering : Sound example 6.15).

Again, we are describing here ways in which networks of musical relationships can be established amongst diverse musical materials.

CHANGING GRAIN-STREAM STRUCTURE

In some ways, a grain-stream is akin to a note-sequence on an instrument, In the latter we have control over the timing and Hpitching and sequencing of the events. In a grain-stream not constructed from individually chosen grains, but e.g. by enveloping a continuous source, we do not initially have this control. However, we would like to be able to treat grains in a similar way to the way we deal with note events. By the appropriate use of gating, cutting and resplicing or remixing, which may be all combined in a single sound processing instrument, we can retime the grains in a sequence using various mathematical templates (slow by a fixed factor, ritardando arithmetically, geometrically or exponentially, randomise grain locations about their mean, shrink the time-frame in similar ways and so on : granular time-warping). The grain-stream can thus be elegantly time-distorted without distorting the grain-constituents. (Sound example 6.16).

We can also reverse the grain order (granular reversing), without reversing the individual grains themselves (sound reversing), producing what a traditional composer would recognise as a retrograde (as opposed to an accumulation : see Chapter 5). Thus a grain-stream moving upwards in pitch would become a grain-stream moving downwards in pitch. (Sound example 6.17).
</page>
