In this way I can learn intuitively, through performance, what is "right" or "wrong" for me in this new situation without necessarily having any conscious explicit knowledge of how I made this decision. The power of the computer both to generate and provide control over the whole sound universe does not require that I explicitly know where to travel.

But beyond this, if the program also recorded my hand movements I could store these intuitively chosen values and these could then be reapplied systematically in new situations, or analysed to determine their mathematical properties so I could consciously generalise my intuitive knowledge to different situations.

In this interface between intuitive knowledge embedded in bodily movement and direct aural feedback, and explicit knowledge carried in a numerical representation, lies one of the most significant contributions of computing technology to the process of musical composition, blurring the distinction between the skill of the performer (intuitive knowledge embedded in performance practice) and the skill of the composer and allowing us to explore the new domain in a more direct and less theory-laden manner.

SOUND COMPOSITION AN OPEN UNIVERSE

Finally, we must declare that the realm of sound composition is a dangerous place for the traditional composer! Composers have been used to working within domains established for many years or centuries. The tempered scale became established in European music over 200 years ago, as did many of the instrumental families. New instruments (e.g. the saxophone) and new ordering procedures (e.g.  serialism) have emerged and been taken on board gradually.

But these changes are minor compared with the transition into sonic composition where every sound and every imaginable process of transformation is available. The implication we wish the reader to draw is that this new domain may not merely lack established limits at this moment, it may turn out to be intrinsically unbounded. The exploratory researching approach to the medium, rather than just the mastering and extension of established craft, may be a necessary requirement to come to grips with this new domain.

Unfortunately, the enduring academic image of the European composer is that of a man (sic) who, from the depths of his (preferably Teutonic) wisdom, wills into existence a musical score out of pure thought.  In a long established and stable tradition with an almost unchanging set of sound-sources (instruments) and a deeply embedded performance practice, perhaps these supermen exist. In contrast, however, good sound composition always includes a process of discovery, and hence a coming to terms with the unexpected and the unwilled, a process increasingly informed by experience as the composer engages in her or his craft, but nevertheless always open to both surprising discovery and to errors of judgement. Humility in the face of experience is an essential character trait!

In particular the sound examples in this book are the result of applying particular musical tools to particular sound sources. Both must be selected with care to achieve some desired musical goal. One cannot simply apply a process, "turn the handle", and expect to get a perceptually similar transformation with whatever sound source one puts into the process. Sonic Art is not like arranging.
<page>9</page>
