
*****M *****
MAJOR
Most european music uses one of two scale patterns, known as the major scale and the minor scale
(the latter having a number of variants).
META-INSTRUMENT
An instrument which provides control instructions for another instrument. E.g. the mixing of sounds is
controlled by a mixing score (which may be a graphic representation of sounds and their entry times, or
a written list in a computer file). A meta-instrument might write or modify the mixing instructions
according to criteria supplied by the composer, or in response to other data.
MF
mezzo forte = moderately loud.
MIDI
Acronym for Musical Instrument Digital Interface. This is a communication protocol for messages sent
between different digital musical instruments and computers. MIDI stores information on which key is
pressed or released, how forcefully (or quickly) it is pressed, and on certain kinds of control information
provided by controllers on digital instruments (e.g. pitch-glide, tremolo etc), together with more
instrument specific data (which synthesis patch is being used). MIDI does NOT record the sound itself.
MINOR
Most european music uses one of two scale patterns, known as the major scale and the minor scale.
The minor scale has two important variants, the melodic and the harmonic minor.
MIX-SHUFFLING
47
MIXING
46
MIXING SCORE
A set of instructions detailing what will happen when a number of sounds are MIXED together. This
might be a text file or a graphic display on a computer, but could equally well be a set of instructions for
moving faders on a mixing desk in a studio. A typical mixing score would contain information about
which sounds were to be used, at what time each would start, how loud each would be, and at what
spatial position each should be placed.
MONO
Sound emanating from a single source (e.g. a single loudspeaker) or a single channel of digital
information. As opposed to stereo.
124