WHAT THIS BOOK IS NOT ABOUT

This book is not about the merits of computers or particular programming packages. However, most of the programs described were available on the Composers Desktop Project (CDP) System at the time of writing. The CDP was developed as a composers cooperative and originated in York, U.K.

Nor will we, outside this chapter, discuss whether or not any of the processes described can be, or ought to be implemented in real time. In due course, many of them will run in real time environments.  My concern here, however, is to uncover the musical possibilities and restraints offered by the medium of sonic composition, not to argue the pros and cons of different technological situations.

A common approach to sound-composition is to define "instruments" - either by manipulating factory patches on a commercial synthesizer, or by recording sounds on a sampler - and then trigger and transpose these sounds from a MIDI keyboard (or some other kind of MIDI controller). Many composers are either forced into this approach, or do not see beyond it, because cheaply available technology is based in the note/instrument conception of music. At its simplest such an approach is no more than traditional note-oriented composition for electronic instruments, particularly where the MIDI interface confines the user to the tempered scale. This is not significantly different from traditional on-paper composition and although this book should give some insight into the design of the 'instruments' used in such an approach, 1 will not discuss the approach as such here - the entire history of European compositional theory is already available!

On the contrary, the assumption in this book is that we are not confined to defining "instruments" to arrange on some preordained pitch/rhythmic structure (though we may choose to adopt this approach in particular circumstances) but may explore the multidimensional space of sound itself, which may be moulded like a sculptural medium in any way we wish.

We also do not aim to cover every possibility (this would, in any case, be impossible) but only a wide and, hopefully, fairly representative, set of processes which are already familiar. In particular, we will focus on the transformation of sound materials taken from the real world, rather than on an approach through synthesis. However, synthesis and analysis have, by now, become so sophisticated, that this distinction need barely concern us any more. It is perfectly possible to use the analysis of a recorded sound to build a synthesis model which generates the original sound and a host of other related sounds.  It is also possible to use sound transformation techniques to change any sound into any other via some well-defined and audible series of steps. The common language is one of intelligent and sophisticated sound transformation so that sound composition has become a plastic art like sculpture. It is with this that we will be concerned.

THINKING ALOUD - A NEW CRITICAL TRADITION

I cannot emphasise strongly enough that my concern is with the world of sound itself, as opposed to the world of notations of sound, or the largely literary disciplines of music score analysis and criticism. I will focus on what can be aurally perceived, on my direct response to these perceptions and on what can be technically, acoustically or mathematically described.
<page>2</page>
