<page id=40>
SPECTRAL FISSION & CONSTRUCTIVE DISTORTION

We have mentioned several times the idea of spectral fusion where the parallel micro-articulation of the many components of a spectrum causes us to perceive it as a unified entity - in the case of a harmonic spectrum, as a single pitch. The opposite process, whereby the spectral components seem to split apart, we will describe as spectral fission. Adding two different sets of vibrato to two different groups of partials within the same spectrum will cause the two sets of partials to be perceived independently - the single aural stream will split into two. (Sound example 3.19).

Spectral fission can be achieved in a number of quite different ways in the frequency domain. Spectral arpeggiation is a process that draws our attention to the individual spectral components by isolating, or emphasising, each in sequence. This can be achieved purely vocally over a drone pitch by using appropriate vowel formants to emphasise partials above the fundamental. The computer can apply this process to any sound-source, even whilst it is in motion. (Sound example 3.20).

Spectral tracing strips away the spectral components in order of increasing loudness (Appendix p25).  When only a few components are left, any sound is reduced to a delicate tracery of (shifting) sine-wave constituents. Complexly varying sources produce the most fascinating results as those partials which are at any moment in the permitted group (the loudest) change from window to window. We hear new partials entering (while others leave) producing "melodies" internal to the source sound. This feature can often be enhanced by time-stretching so that the rate of partial change is slowed down. Spectral tracing can also be done in a time-variable manner so that a sound gradually dissolves into its internal sine-wave tracery. (Sound example 3.21).

Spectral time-stretching, which we will deal with more fully in Chapter 11, can produce unexpected spectral consequences when applied to noisy sounds. In a noisy sound the spectrum is changing too quickly for us to gain any pitch or inharmonic multi-pitched percept from any particular time-window.  Once, however, we slow down the rate of change the spectrum becomes stable or stable-in-motion for long enough for us to hear out the originally instantaneous window values. In general, these are inharmonic and hence we produce a "metallic" inharmonic (usually moving) ringing percept. By making perceptible what was not previously perceptible we effect a "magical" transformation of the sonic material. Again, this can be effected in a time-varying manner so that the inharmonicity emerges gradually from within the stretching sound. (Sound example 3.22).

Alternatively we may elaborate the spectrum in the time-domain by a process of constructive distortion. By searching for wavesets (zero-crossing pairs: Appendix p50) and then repeating the wavesets before proceeding to the next (Waveset time-stretching) we may time stretch the source without altering its pitch (see elsewhere for the limitations on this process). (Appendix p55).  Wavesets correspond to wavecycles in many pitched sounds, but not always (Appendix p50). Their advantage in the context of constructive distortion is that very noisy sounds, having no pitch, have no true wavecycles - but we can still segment them into wavesets (Appendix p50).

In a very simple sound source (e.g. a steady waveform, from any oscillator) waveset time-stretching produces no artefacts. In a complexly evolving signal (especially a noisy one) each waveset will be different, often radically different, to the previous one, but we will not perceptually register the content of that waveset in its own right (see the discussion of time-frames in Chapter 1). It merely contributes to the more general percept of noisiness. The more we repeat each waveset however, the closer it comes to the grain threshold where we can hear out the implied pitch and the spectral quality implicit in
</page>
