<page id=39>
Finally, we can introduce a sense of multiple-sourcedness (!) to a sound (e.g. make a single voice appear crowd-like) by adding small random time-changing perturbations to the loudnesses of the spectral components (spectral shaking). mimics part of the effect of several voices attempting to deliver the same information. (Sound example 3.15). We may also perturb the partial frequencies (Sound example 3.16).

SPECTRAL BANDING

Once we understand that a spectrum contains many separate components, we can imagine processing the sound to isolate or separate these components. Filters, by permitting components in some frequency bands to pass and rejecting others, allow us to select parts of the spectrum for closer observation. With dense or complex spectra the results of filtering can be relatively unexpected revealing aspects of the sound material not previously appreciated. A not-too-narrow and static band pass filter will transform a complex sound-source (usually) retaining its morphology (time-varying shape) so that the resulting sound will relate to the source sound through its articulation in time.  (Sound example 3.17).

A filter may also be used to isolate some static or moving feature of a sound. In a crude way, filters may be used to eliminate unwanted noise or hums in recorded sounds, especially as digital filters can be very precisely tuned. In the frequency domain, spectral components can be eliminated on a channel-by-channel basis, either in terms of their frequency location (using spectral splitting to define a frequency band and setting the band loudness to zero) or in terms of their timevarying relative loudness (spectral tracing will eliminate the N least significant, i.e. quietest, channel components, window by window. At an elementary level this can be used for signal-dependent noise reduction. But see also "Spectral Fission" below). More radically, sets of narrow band pass filters can be used to force a complex spectrum onto any desired Hpitch set (HArmonic field in the traditional sense). (Sound example 3.18).

In a more signal sensitive sense a filter or a frequency-domain channel selector can be used to separate some desired feature of a sound, e.g. a moving high frequency component in the onset, a particular strong middle partial etc, for further compositional development. In particular, we can separate the spectrum into parts (using band pass filters or spectral splitting) and apply processes to the N separated parts (e.g. pitch-shift, add vibrato) and then recombine the two parts perhaps reconstituting the spectrum in a new form. However, if the spectral parts are changed too radically e.g.  adding completely different vibrato to each part, they will not fuse when remixed, but we may be interested in the gradual dissociation of the spectrum. This leads us into the next area.

Ultimately we may use a procedure which follows the partials themselves, separating the signal into its component partials (partial tracking). This is quite a complex task which will involve pitch tracking and pattern-matching (to estimate where the partials might lie) on a window by window basis. Ideally it must deal in some way with inharmonic sounds (where the form of the spectrum is not known in advance) and noise sources (where there are, in effect, no partials). This technique is however particularly powerful as it allows us to set up an additive synthesis model of our analysed sound and thereby provides a bridge between unique recorded sound-events and the control available through synthesis.
</page>
