On the other hand, we also have explicit knowledge of, e.g. acceptable HArmonic progressions within a given style or the spectral contour of a particular vowel formant (see Chapter 3). This is knowledge that we know that we know and we can give an explicit description of it to others in language or mathematics. Explicit knowledge of this kind is stressed in the training, and usually in the practice of, traditional composers.

In traditional "on paper" composition, the aura of explicitness is enhanced because it results in a definitive text (the score) which can often be given a rational exegesis by the composer or by a music score-analyst. Some composers (particularly the presently devalued "romantic" composers), may use the musical score merely as a notepad for their intuitive musical outpourings. Others may occasionally do the same but in a cultural atmosphere where explicit rational decision-making is most highly prized, will claim, post-hoc, to have worked it all out in an entirely explicit and rational way.

Moreover, in the music-cultural atmosphere of the late Twentieth Century, it appears "natural" to assume that the use of the computer will favour a totally explicit approach to composition. At some level, the computer must have an exact description of what it is required to do, suggesting therefore that the composer must also have a clearly explicit description of the task. (1 will describe later why this is not so).

The absurd and misguided rationalist nightmare of the totally explicit construction of all aspects of a musical work is not the "natural" outcome of the use of computer technology in musical composition - just one of the less interesting possibilities.

It might be supposed that the pure electro-acoustic composer making a composition directly onto a recording medium has already abandoned intuitive knowledge by eliminating the performer and his/her role. The fact, however, is that most electro-acoustic composers 'play' with the medium, exploring through informed, and often real-time, play the range of possibilities available during the course of composing a work. Not only is this desirable. In a medium where everything is possible, it is an essential part of the compositional process. In this case a symbiosis is taking place between composerly and performerly activities and as the activity of composer and performer begin to overlap, the role of intuitive and explicit knowledge in musical composition, must achieve a new equilibrium.

In fact, in all musical practice, some balance must be struck between what is created explicitly and what is created intuitively. In composed Western art music where a musical score is made, the composer takes responsibility for the organisation of certain well-controlled parameters (pitch, duration, instrument type) up to a certain degree of resolution. Beyond this, performance practice tradition and the player's intuitive control of the instrumental medium takes over in pitch definition (especially in processes of succession from pitch to pitch on many instruments, and with the human voice), timing precision or its interpretation, and sound production and articulation.

At the other pole, the free-improvising performer relies on an intuitive creative process (restrained by the intrinsic sound/pitch limitations of a sound source, e.g. a retuned piano, a metal sheet). to generate both the moment-to-moment articulation of events and the ongoing time structure at all levels.

However, even in the free-improvisation case, the instrument builder (or, by accident, the found-object manufacturer) is providing a framework of restrictions (the sound world, the pitch-set, the articulation possibilities) which bound the musical universe which the free improviser may explore. In the sense that an instrument builder sets explicit limits to the performer's free exploration she/he has a restricting role similar to that of the composer.
<page>6</page>
