<page id=73>
In this sequence we probably retain the sense of an underlying measured percept (which is being articulated by random scattering) a long way into the sequence. We are given a reference frame by the initial strict presentation, which we carry with us into the later examples. If we were presented with some of the later examples without hearing the reference frame, we would perhaps be more willing to declare them arhythmic.

Taking the sequence in the opposite order, there may be a perceptual switching point at which we suddenly become aware of rhythmic order in the sequence. (Sound example 9.3).

Let us now look at this situation from another viewpoint. Beginning again with our strictly rhythmic set of events, we note that the event-onsets lie on (or very close to) a perceivable time grid or reference-frame (the smallest common beat subdivision, which may also be thought of as a time-quantisation grid). Allowing event-onsets to be displaced randomly by very small amounts from this time reference-frame, we initially retain the percept of this reference frame and of a rhythm in the event stream. Once these excursions are large, however, our perception of the frame, and in consequence rhythmicity, breaks down.

It is informative to compare this with the analogous situation pertaining to an Hpitch reference frame.  Here we would begin with events confined to an Hpitch set (a HArmonic field), then gradually randomise the tuning of notes from the Hpitch set, slowly destroying the Hpitch field characteristics, even though we might retain the relative up-downness in the pitch sequencing.

From this comparison we can see that a durational reference-frame underlying rhythmic perception is similar to a field, and rhythm is an ordering relation over such a reference frame. Dissolving rhythmicity is hence analogous to dissolving the percept of Hpitch which also relates intrinsically to a reference set.

Strictly speaking, to provide a precise analogy with our use of HArmonic field, a duration field would be the set of all event-onset-separation durations used in a rhythmic sequence. However, just as underlying any HArmonic field we may be able to define a frame made up of the smallest common intervallic unit (e.g. the semitone for scales played in the Western tempered scale, the srutis of the Indian rag system), it is more useful to think of the smallest subdivision of all the duration values in our rhythmic sequence, which we will refer to as the time-frame of the event. In an idealised form, this may also be thought of as the time quantisation grid.

Such a time-frame, constructed from our perception of event-onset-separation duration, provides a perceptual reference at a particular scale of temporal activity. As such it provides us with a way to extend the notion of perceptual time-frames used previously to define sample-level, grain-level and continuation-level perception (or lack of it) into longer swathes of time. Moreover, because such time-frames may be nested (see below) we can in fact define a hierarchy of time-frames up to and including the duration of an entire work.

Just as with the dissolution of Hpitch perception, it is the dissolution of the time-frame which leads us from field-ordered (rhythmic) perception of temporal organisation to density perception. And just as dissolving the Hpitch percept by the randomisation of tuning leaves us with many comparatively perceived pitch properties to compose, dissolving the time-reference-frame leads us into the complex domain of event-onset-separation-density-articulation discussed in the previous chapter.
</page>
