<page id=97>
However, a percept of interpolation is possible without such clear referential clues where there is a distinct change in the sense of physicality or causality of the source (see Chapter 1).

Hence, by greatly spectrally time-stretching a voice, or a flexed metal sheet sound, and then imposing a rapid series of hard-edged loudness trajectories on the resulting continuum, we move from the sense of forced continuation of an elastic medium, to a sense of striking a hard inflexible medium. Both physicality and causality have been altered. (Sound example 12.1).

Hence modifications to onset characteristics, the rate of spectral change (and elsewhere to the irregularity-regularity of sequencing etc) alter our intuitive type-classifications of the sounds we hear.  When compositional processes move sounds across these boundaries, we create the percept of interpolation.

MEDIATION : AMBIGUITY : CHANGE

Before we go on to discuss compositional methods for achieving interpolation, it is worth considering why we might want to do it. There would seem to be at least three different motivations for musical interpolation and each motivation leads to a different emphasis in the way the technique is applied.

The first approach is aimed at achieving some kind of mediation in sound between distinct sound types.  This approach may be heard in Stockhausen's Gesang der Junglinge where the 'pure' pitched singing voice of a young boy and pure (pitched) sine tones are mediated through a set of intermediate pitched sounds (sounds between 'boy' and 'sine tone').

This desire to mediate between the child's voice and a set of more 'abstract' (i.e. less source-recognisable) sounds, has a metaphysical underpinning (a religious conception of 'unity' in the cosmos), which pervades much of Stockhausen's musical thought. The mediation is not achieved through dynamic interpolation (technologically almost impossible at the time), nor through a clear progressive movement from one sound-type to the other, but in the sense that the piece is grounded in a field of sound types which span the range 'boy's voice' to 'sine tone'. These are sequentially articulated according to an entirely different logic (a serialist sequencing aesthetic), which also governs the rest of the musical organisation in the piece.

A second approach to sound interpolation stresses the ambiguous implications of the sounds thus created. Roger Reynold's has used interpolations between a voice speaking a Samuel Beckett text in English, the same voice speaking the text in French and the sound of brass instruments. Interpolation takes place in two dimensions, between English and French on the one hand and between voice and instrument on the other. The composer focuses on the cusp of the interpolations, where we are most undecided about whether what we hear is English or French, voice or instrument. This approach also has its own metaphysical implications, if of a more secular variety. Technically the aim (and difficulty) here, is to achieve a percept which is capable of these dual interpretations without entirely losing 'source credibility' (i.e. is it anything at all that we can recognise?). This can be particularly difficult, even with the most advanced technology.
</page>
