<page id=60>
Using brassage techniques, we may achieve similar results, if the segment size is set suitably large and we work on a clearly spectrally-evolving source. Using several brassages with similar segment length settings but different ranges (see Appendix p44-C) we might create a group of sequences with identical field properties but different, yet related, order properties i.e. smaller ranges would tend to preserve the order relations of the source, large ranges would reveal the material in the order sequence of the source but, in the meantime, return unpredictably to already revealed materials. (Sound example 7.5).

Brassage with pitch variation of segments over a finite Hpitch set (possibly cyclically) could establish an Hpitch-sequence from a pitch-continuous (or other) source. (Sound example 7.6). Even brassage with spatialisation (see Appendix p45) will separate a continuous (or any other) source into a spatial sequence and so long as they are clearly delineated, such spatial sequences can be musically manipulated (Sound example 7.7). A sequence from left to right can become a sequence from right to left, or a sequence generally moving to the left from the right but with deviations, can be restationed at a point in space, or change to an alternation of spatial position and so on.

The perception of sequence can also be destroyed in various ways. Increasing the speed of a sequence beyond a certain limit will produce a gritty noise or even, in the special circumstance of a sequence of regularly spaced events with strong attacks, a pitch percept. Conversely, time-stretching the sequence beyond a certain limit will bring the internal properties of the sequence into the phrase time-frame and the sequence of events will become a formal property of the larger time-frame. (Sound example 7.8).

Alternatively, copies of the sequence, or (groups of) its constituents may be amassed in textures (see Chapter 8) of sufficient density that our perception of sequence is overwhelmed. (Sound example 7.9).

Conversely a sequence may be shredded (sound shredding). In this process the sequence is cut into random-length conjunct segments which are then reordered randomly. This process may be repeated ad infinitum, gradually dissolving all but the most persistent spectral properties of the sequence in a watery complexity (the complex in fact becomes a simple unitary percept). (See Appendix p41). (Sound example 7.10).

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF SEQUENCES

All sequences have two general properties. They can define both a field and an order. Thus, on the large scale, the set of utterances with a particular natural language defines a field, the set of phonemes which may be used in the language. Similarly any sequence played on a piano defines the tuning set or HArmonic field of the piano (possibly just a subset of it). It is possible to construct sequences which do not have this property (in which no elements are repeated) just as it is possible to construct pitch fields where no Hpitch reference-frame is set up. But in general, for a finite piece of music, we will be working within some field, a reference-frame for the sequence constituents. (Sound example 7.11).

Sequences are also characterised by order properties. In existing musical languages, certain sequences of notes will be commonplace, others exceedingly unlikely. In a particular natural language certain clusterings of consonants (e.g. "scr" in English) will be commonplace. others rare and yet others absent. It is easy to imagine and to generate unordered sequences, though the human mind's pattern seeking predilection makes it over-deterministic, hearing definite pattern where pattern is only hinted at!
</page>
