<page id=47>
time-stretching the onset is much more perceptually potent than time-stretching the continuation.  This issue is discussed in Chapter 1. Also editing procedures on sequences (melodies, speech-stream etc.) in many circumstances need to preserve event onsets if they are not to radically alter the perceived nature of the materials (the latter, of course, may be desired). Finally, extremely dense textures in mono will eventually destroy onset characteristics, whereas stereo separation will allow the ear to discriminate event onsets even in very dense situations. (Sound example 4.9).

ALTERED CAUSALITY

Because the onset characteristics of a sound are such a significant clue to the sound's origin, we can alter the causality of a sound through various compositional devices. In particular, a sound with a vocal onset tends to retain its "voiceness" when continuation information contradicts our initial intuitive assumption. The piece Vox-5 uses this causality transfer throughout in a very conscious way but it can operate on a more immediate level.

Listen first to Sound example 4.10. A vocally initiated event transforms in a strange (and vocally impossible) way. If we listen more carefully, we will hear that there is a splice (in fact a splice at a zero crossing: zero-cutting) in this sound where the vocal initiation is spliced onto its non-vocal (but voice derived) continuation. (In Vox-5 the vocal/non-vocal transitions are achieved by smooth spectral interpolation, rather than abrupt splicing - see Chapter 12). When this abrupt change is pointed out to us, we begin to notice it as a rather obvious discontinuity, the "causal chain" is broken, but in the wider context of a musical piece, using many such voice initiated events, we may not so easily hone in on the discontinuity.

A more radical causality shift can be produced by onset fusion. When we hear two sounds at the same time certain properties of the aural stream allow us to differentiate them. Even when we hear two violinists playing in unison, we are aware that we are hearing two violins and not a single instrument producing the same sound stream. At least two important factors in our perception permit us to differentiate the two sources. Firstly, the micro fluctuations of the spectral components from one of the sources will be precisely in step with one another but generally out of step with those of the other source. So in the continuation we can aurally separate the sources. Secondly, the onset of the two events will be slightly out of synchronisation no matter how accurately they are played. Thus we can aurally separate the two sources in the onset moments.

If we now precisely align the onsets of two (or more) sounds to the nearest sample (onset synchronisation) our ability to separate the sources at onset is removed. The instantaneous percept is one of a single source. However, the continuation immediately reveals that we are mistaken. We thus produce a percept with "dual causality". At its outset it is one source but it rapidly unfolds into two.

In Sound example 4.11 from Vox-5 this process is applied to three vocal sources. Listen carefully to the first sound in the sequence. The percept is of "bell" but also voices, even though the sources are only untransformed voices. This initial sound initiates a sequence of similar sounds, but as the sequence proceeds the vocal sources are also gradually spectrally stretched (See Chapter 3) becoming more and more bell-like in the process.
</page>
