<page id=56>
CONSTRUCTING GRAIN STREAMS

Grain-streams appear naturally from iterative sound-production - any kind of roll or trill on drums, keyed percussion or any sounding material. They are produced vocally by rolled "r" sounds of various sorts in various languages, by lip-farts and by tracheal rasps. Vocally, such sounds may be used to modulate others (sung rolled "r", whistled rolled "r", flutter-tongued woodwind and brass etc). The rapid opening and closing of a resonating cavity containing a sound source (e.g. the hand over the mouth as we sing or whistle) can be used to naturally grain-stream any sound. (Sound example 6.3).

In the studio, any continuous sound may be grain-streamed by imposing an appropriate on-off type loudness trajectory (enveloping), which itself might be obtained by envelope following another sound (see Chapter 10). (On-offness might be anything from a deep tremolando fluttering to an abrupt on-off gating of the signal). A particularly elegant way to achieve the effect is to generate a loudness trajectory on a sound tied to the wavesets or wavecycles it contains (waveset enveloping). If each on-off type trajectory is between about 25 and 100 wavesets in length, we will hear grain-streaming.  (Below this limit, we may produce a rasping or spectral "coarsening" of the source sound). This process ties the grain-streaming to the internal properties of the source-sound so, for example, the grain- streaming ritardandos if the perceived pitch falls. This suggests to the ear that the falling portamento and the ritardando are causally linked and intrinsic to the goal-sound, rather than a compositional affectation (!). (Sound example 6.4).

Alternatively grain-streams may be constructed by splicing together individual grains (!). Looping can be used to do this but will produce a mechanically regular result. An instrument which introduces random fluctuations of repetition-rate and randomly varies the pitch and loudness of successive grains over a small range (iteration) produces a more convincingly natural result (Sound example 6.5).

More compositionally flexible, but more pernickety, is to use a mixing program so that individual grains can be placed and ordered, then repositioned, replaced or reordered using meta-instruments which allow us to manipulate mixing instructions (mixshuffling) or to generate and manipulate time-sequences (sequence generation).

In this way grain-streams can be given gentle accelerandos or ritardandos of different shapes and be slightly randomised to avoid a mechanistic result. (Sound example 6.6). Similarly, the grains themselves can be sequentially modified using some kind of enveloping (see Chapter 4), or spectral transformation tools (e.g. destructive distortion through waveset distortion, waveset harmonic distortion or waveset-averaging : see Chapter 3) combined perhaps with inbetweening (see Chapter 12) to generate a set of intermediate sound-states. (Sound example 6.7).

Short continuous sounds can be extended into longer grain-streamed sound by using brassage with appropriate (grain time-frame duration) segment-size (Sound example 6.8). The granulation of the resulting sound can be exaggerated by corrugation (see Chapter 10) and the regularity of the result mitigated by using some of the grain-stream manipulation tools to be described below.

Many of these compositional processes provide means of establishing audible (musical) links between materials of different types. We are able to link grains with grain-streams and continuous sounds with grain-streams in this way and hence begin to build networks of musical relationships amongst diverse materials.
</page>
