<page id=53>
samplers to allow a short sampled sound to be sustained. It may work adequately where the chosen portion of the sound has a stable pitch and spectrum. In general, however, any segment of a sound, beyond grain time-frame, will have a continuation structure and looping over it will cause this structure to be heard as a mechanical repetition in the sound. (see Appendix p43). (Sound example 5.16).

Zigzagging, however, can move from any point to any other within the sound, constantly changing length and average position as it does so. We can therefore use the process to select spectral, pitch or loudness movements or discontinuities in a sound and focus attention on them by alternating repetition.  By altering the zigzag points subtly from zig to zig, we may vary the length (and hence duration) over the repeated segment. In this way zigzagging can be used to generate non-mechanical undulatory properties, or (on a longer timescale) dispersal-accumulation (see above) effects, within a sound-continuation. (Sound example 5.17).

Sounds can also be artificially continued by brassage. In the brassage process successive segments are cut from a sound and then respliced together to produce a new sound. Clearly, if the segments are replaced exactly as they were cut, we will reproduce the original sound. We can extend the duration of the sound by cutting overlapping segments from the source, but not overlapping them in the goal sound. (See Appendix p44-B). (see note at end of chapter).

As discussed previously, grain time-frame segments will produce a simple time-stretching of the sound (harmoniser effect). Slightly larger segments may introduce a granular percept into the sound as the perceived evolving shapes of the segments are heard as repeated. (Sound example 5.18). The segment granulation of an already granular source may produce unexpected phasing or delay effects within the sound. Longer segments, especially when operating on a segmented source (a melody, a speech stream) will result in a systematic collage of its elements. With regular segment-size our attention will be drawn to the segment length and the percept will probably bc repetitively rhythmic.  However, we may vary the segment size, either progressively or at random, producing a less rhythmicized, collage type extension. (Sound example 5.19).

This idea of brassage can be generalised. Using non-regular grain size near to the grain time-frame boundary, the instantaneous articulations of the sound will be echoed in an irregular fashion adding a spectral (very short time-frame) or articulatory (brief but longer time-frame) aura to the time-stretched source. We may also permit the process to select segments from within a time-range measured backwards from the current position in the source-sound (see Appendix p44-C). In this way, echo percepts are randomised further. Subtly controlling this and the previous factors, we can extract rich fields of possibilities from the small features of sounds with evolving spectra (especially sequences, which present us with constantly and perceptibly evolving spectra). (Sound example 5.20).

Ultimately, we can make the range include the entire span of the sound up to the current position (see Appendix p44-D). Now, as we proceed, all the previous properties of the sound become grist to the mill of continuation-production. In the case e.g. of a long, melodic phrase which we brassage in this way using a relatively large segment-size (including several notes) we will create a new melodic stream including more and more of the notes in the original melody. The original melody will thus control the evolving HArmonic field of Hpitch possibilities in the goal sound. (Sound example 5.21). On a smaller time-frame, the qualities of a highly characteristic onset event can be redistributed over the entire ensuing continuation. (Sound example 5.22).
</page>
