<pageid=110>
in the sequential domain. Stream interaction in an elementary sense can be heard in Steve Reich's phasing pieces and in the ululation section of Vox-5 (see Chapter 11) but in neither of these cases is the material in the separate streams undergoing real morphic change (in Vox-5 the streams move in space relative to one another).

Imagine, for example, a detailed control of several pitch-portamento lines over long time-frames, or a texture-stream which undergoes continual morphic development of density, granularity, spectral energy focus, pitch-band width, pitch-band-location, internal pitch-stream motion etc, and which can diverge into perceptually separate streams, perhaps moving separately in space, before uniting sonically and spatially at a later time.

Imagine also a theatre situation in which we see the quite separate evolution of two characters with entirely different, but internally consistent, goals and desires. Then external circumstances conspire to cause the two to meet briefly in a small room. The theatrical outcome is dramatic and we, as audience, have an inkling of how this collision of personalities might turn out, whereas the characters are unprepared for this chance encounter. After their meeting, both their lives are changed dramatically.  From a broader perspective, this is also stream-counterpoint, the collision and mutual interaction of developing streams.

The possibilities in this domain remain almost entirely unexplored, a rich seam of development for any sound composer who can grasp the concepts and mathematical controls of morphic flow processes.

POSTLUDE : TIME & SPACE

The forms of living organisms are the result of continuous processes of flow (growth) - they are morphic forms captured in space. Even the calcified remains of sea creatures (e.g. the shell of the Nautilus) tell us about the processes of continuous growth which formed them, and any spatial proportions we may observe in the final forms are merely the traces of these continuous processes, time-flows revealed in space.

What strikes us as formally coherent about a tree is not some exact and static proportioning of branching points and branch angles, but the way in which a flexible (and environmentally sensitive) expression of some branching principle is realised through a process of branching flow. The overall state of a particular flow pattern (its result being the current state of the tree) links our perception of one member of a tree species with the other members of the same species.

Unlike the growing tree, a musical event never fixes its time-flow evolution in a spatial object, it is intrinsically evanescent and a musical score is not the musical experience itself, but a set of instructions to generate this aetherial substance, just as the genetic code is a set of instructions to grow an organism. The symmetries of the DNA molecule are not, in any sense, copies or analogues of the symmetries of the organism. Similarly, we cannot assume that spatial order in a musical score corresponds to some similar sense of order in our musical experience of time-flow.

The way in which we divide experience into the spatially codifiable and the flowing governs much more than our attitude to music. Human social life itself is an experience of interactive flow, or growth, amongst human individuals. Some people find all flow (growth, change) unsettling and seek to codify experience, professional practice, social order and even human relationships in strict categories. Others see categoric divisions as temporary pens in which we attempt to corral the flow of experience and history.
</page>
