<page id=54>
The brassage components may also be varied in pitch. If this is done at random over a very small range, the effect will be to broaden the pitch band or the spectral energy of the original sound. (Sound example 5.23). We may also cycle round a set of pitches in a very small band providing a subtle "stepped vibrato" inside the continuation (particularly if grain-size is slightly random-varied to avoid rhythmic constructs in perception). (Sound example 5.24). The pitch band can also be progressively broadened. (Sound example 5.25). The loudness of segments can also be varied in a random, progressive or cyclical way. We might also spatialise, or progressively spatialise, the segmented components, moving from a point source to a spread source. (Sound example 5.26).

Eventually, such evolved manipulations (and their combinations) force a continuous or coherently segmented source to dissociate into a mass of atomic events. The ultimate process of this type is Sound shredding which completely deconstructs the original sound and will be discussed in Chapter 7.

CONSTRUCTED CONTINUATION : GRANULAR RECONSTRUCTION

We may generalise the brassage concept further, taking us into the realm of granular reconstruction. As with brassage, our source sound is cut into segments which we may vary in duration, pitch or loudness.  However, instead of merely resplicing these tail-to-tail, they are used as the elements of an evolving texture in which we can control the density and the time-randomisation of the elements. (See Appendix p73). (Sound example 5.27).

In this way we can overlay segments in the resulting stream, or, if segments are very short, introduce momentary silences between the grains. This process, especially where used with very tiny grains, is also known as granular synthesis (the boundaries between sound processing and synthesis are fluid) and we may expect the spectral properties and the onset characteristics of the grains to influence the quality of the resulting sound stream, alongside imposed stream characteristics (density, pitch spread, loudness spread, spatial spread etc.). This process then passes over into texture control, and is discussed more fully in Chapter 8. (Sound example 5.28).

With granular reconstruction, if we keep the range and pitch-spread small, we may expect to generate a time-stretched goal-sound which is spectrally thickened (and hence often more noisy, or at least less focussed), the degree of thickening being controlled by our choice of both density and pitch bandwidth. But as range, density and bandwidth are increased and segment duration varied, perhaps progressively, the nature of the source will come to have a less significant influence on the goal sound.  It will become part of the overall field-properties of a texture stream (see Chapter 8). (Sound example 5.29).

Final note : in order to simplify the discussion in this chapter (and also in the diagrammatic appendix) Brassage has been described here as a process in which the cut segments are not overlapped (apart from the length of the edits themselves) when they are reassembled. In practice, normal brassage/harmoniser processes use a certain degree of overlap of the adjacent segments to ensure sonic continuity and avoid granular artefacts (where these are not required) in the resulting sound.
</page>
