<page id=32>
DUAL PITCH

Various compositional processes allow us to generate more than one pitch from a sound. For example, using the harmoniser approach we can shift the pitch of a sound without altering its duration and then mix this with the original pitch. Apart from the fact that we can apply this technique to any sound, it differs from simply playing two notes on the same instrument because the variations and microfluctuations of the two pitches remain fairly well in step, a situation impossible to achieve with two separate performers, though it may be closely approached by a single performer using e.g.  double-stopping on a stringed instrument. The technique tends to be more musically interesting when used on subtly fluctuating sounds, rather than as a cost-saving way of adding conventional HArmony to a melodic line. (Sound example 2.14).

As usual, the harmoniser algorithm introduces significant artefacts over larger interval shifts. An alternative approach, therefore, is to use spectral shifting in the frequency domain, superimposing the result on the original source. In fact, we can use this kind of spectral shifting to literally split the spectrum in two, shifting only a part of the spectrum. The two sets of partials thus generated will imply two different fundamentals and the sound will appear to have a split pitch. (Appendix p18). (Sound example 2.15).

All these techniques cane be applied dynamically so that the pitch of a sound gradually splits in two.  (Sound example 2.16).

Small pitch-shifts, superimposed on the original sound add "body" to the sound, producing the well known "chorus" effect (an effect produced naturally by a chorus of similar singers, or similar instruments playing the same pitches. where small variations in tuning between individual singers, or players, broaden the spectral band of the resultant massed sound). (Sound example 2.17).

A different kind of pitch duality can be produced when the focus of energy in the spectrum (spectral peak) moves markedly above a fixed pitch or over a pitch which is moving in a contrary direction. There are not truly two pitches present in these cases but percepts of conflicting frequency motions within the sound can certainly be established. With very careful control, including the phasing in and out of partials at the top and bottom of the spectrum, sounds can be created which get higher in Hpitch yet lower in tessitura (or lower in Hpitch but higher in tessitura) - the so called Shepard Tones. (see On Sonic Art and Appendix p72). (Sound example 2.18).

Similarly, by appropriate filtering, we can individually reinforce the harmonics (or partials) in a spectrum so that our attention is drawn to them as perceived pitches in their own right (as in Tibetan chanting or Tuvan harmonics singing). (Sound example 2.19).

Another pitch phenomena which is worth noting is the pitch drift associated with spectral stretching (see Appendix p19 and Chapter 3). If the partials of a pitch-spectrum are gradually moved so the relationship ceases to be harmonic (no longer whole number multiples of the fundamental), the sound will begin to present several pitches to our perception (like bell sounds). Moreover if the stretch is upwards, even if the fundamental frequency is present in the spectrum and remains unchanged, the lowest perceived pitch may gradually move upwards. (Sound example 2.20).
</page>
