<page id=49>
The structures of dispersal and accumulation can be combined to generate more interesting continuation structures. By splicing copies of one segment of a dispersal sound in a back-to-back fashion so that the reversed version exactly dovetails into its forward version, we can create an ebb and flow of spectral energy (see Diagram 1). By time-variably time-stretching (time-warping)the result, we can avoid a merely time-cyclic ebb and flow. More significantly, the closer we cut to the onset of the original sound, the more spectral momentum our accumulation will gather before releasing into the dispersal phase. Hence we can build up a set of related events with different degrees of musical intensity or tension as the accumulation approaches closer and closer to the onset point. (See Diagram 2). As the listener cannot tell how close any particular event will approach, the sense of spectral anticipation can be played with as an aspect of compositional structure.

This reminds me somewhat of the Japanese gourmet habit of eating a fish which is poisonous if the flesh too close to the liver is eaten. Some officionados, out of bravado, ask for the fish to be cut within a hair's breadth of the liver, sometime with fatal consequences. Sound composition is, fortunately, a little less dangerous. (Sound example 5.3).

Again. time-warping, spatial motion or different types of spectral reinforcement (see Chapter 3) can be used to develop this basic idea.

UNDULATING CONTINUATION AND ITS DEVELOPMENT

Certain time varying properties of sound evolve in an undulating fashion. The most obvious examples of these are , undulation of pitch (vibrato) and undulation of loudness (tremolando). Undulating continuation is related to physical activities like shaking and it is no accident that a wide, trill-like, vibrato is known as a "shake". These variations in vocal sounds involve, in some sense, the physical shaking of the diaphragm, larynx or throat or (in more extended vocal techniques) the rib cage, the head or the whole body (!). This may also be induced in elastic physical objects (like thin metal sheets, thin wooden boards etc) by physically shaking them. (Sound example 5.4).

In naturally occuring vibrato and tremolando, there is moment-to-moment instability of undulation speed (frequency) and undulation depth (pitch-excursion for vibrato, loudness fluctuation for tremolando) which is not immediately obvious until we create artificial vibrato or tremolando in which these features are completely regular. Completely regular speed, in particular, gives the undulation a cyclical, or rhythmic, quality drawing our attention to its rhythmicity. (Sound example 5.5).

Both speed and depth of vibrato or tremolo may have an overall trajectory (e.g. increasing speed, decreasing depth etc.). In many non-Western art music cultures, subtle control of vibrato speed and depth is an important aspect of performance practice. Even in Western popular music, gliding upwards onto an Hpitch as vibrato is added, is a common phenomena. (Sound example 5.6).

Vocal vibrato is in fact a complex phenomenon. Although the pitch (and therefore the partials) of the sound drift up and down in frequency, for a given vowel sound the spectral peaks (formants) remain where they are, or, in dipthongs, move independently. (See Appendix p10 and p66). The pitch excursions of vibrato thus make it more likely that any particular partial in a sound will spend at least a little of its existence in the relatively amplified environment of a spectral peak. Hence vibrato can be used to add volume to the vocal sound. (See Diagram 3).
</page>
