
CADENCE
A recognised device in a musical language which signals the end of a musical phrase, section or piece.
CAUSALITY
The way in which the sound was apparently initiated. NOT the actual cause of the sound. Was the
source apparently struck, rubbed, shaken, spun etc. ??
CHANGE RINGING
A form of bell-ringing in which the order in which the bells are sounded is permuted in specific ways.
CHANNEL
Channel is most often used in this book to refer to an analysis channel. We derive the spectrum
(frequency domain representation) of a sound from its waveform (time-domain representation) by a
process of analysis. In doing the analysis we must decide how accurate we would like to be. We may
search for a partial in each block of 100 cycles per second (i.e. between 50 and 150, 150 and 250, 250
and 350 etc) or, more discriminatingly, in each block of 10 cycles per second (i.e. between 5 and 15, 15
and 25, 25 and 30 etc.). These search blocks are the channels of the analysis. Channels should not be
confused with WINDOWS.
Channel is also used to refer to the right hand and left hand parts of a stereo sound (which can be
viewed as two separate streams of digital information).
CHORD
A set of pitches initiated and sounding at the same time. Usually a set of pitches within a known
reference set (e.g. the European tempered scale).
CHORUSING
45
A process of making a single musical source (e.g. a voice) sound like a group of similar sources all
making the same sound (e.g. a chorus of singers singing the same pitch).
CHROMATIC SCALE
The european scale consisting of all the semitone divisions of the octave.
COMB-FILTER TRANSPOSITION
65
A quick method of achieving octave-upward transposition of a sound, where its pitch is known.
COMB-FILTERING
64
114